# Data＆Methodology

This paper makes the simple assumption that only bank fees and household income affect whether people use a bank account or not. I conducted a statistical analysis to understand the effects of annual bank charges and annual household income on bank usage. For this purpose, bank fees, household income, and bank usage data are used.

(1) Bank fees data: This paper uses the survey data by Bankrate for bank fees data. Bankrate can obtain two types of bank cost data: (a) average monthly service fee and (b) average overdraft fee per instance. A monthly service fee or maintenance fee is a charge that account holders may incur monthly just for having a checking account with a financial institution. An overdraft fee is incurred when you spend more money than you have available in your bank account. You can overdraw your account by writing checks, swiping debit cards, withdrawing cash at ATMs, and setting up an automatic debit card or ACH payments. The FinHealth report found that 43 percent of vulnerable households with checking accounts reported having overdrawn in the past year and incurred a related fee, with 9.6 overdrafts on average. For regression analysis, the annual bank fees are calculated as the sum of 12 times the monthly service fee and 9.6 times the average overdraft fee per incident. 

(2) Household income data: This paper uses U.S. census data for household income data. According to the FDIC data (“A.6 Interest in Having a Bank Account, Among Unbanked Households, by Previous Bank Account Ownership and Household Characteristics, 2019”) in 2019, of the 6.9 million unbanked households, 3.2 million (about 47%) have annual household incomes below $15,000, and 5.1 million (about 75%) have annual household incomes below $30,000. Given that unbanked households are more likely to be low-income households, I use the bottom 20th percentile of household income (approximately $25,000) for the analysis from “Table A-4a.Selected Measures of Household Income Dispersion: 1967 to 2020.”According to a footnote in Table A4, the income data are adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index data.

(3) Bank usage data: This analysis uses FDIC Survey on Household Use of Banking and Financial Services as a source for bank usage data. This survey began in 2009 and is conducted every two years. This analysis uses data from 2009 to 2019. Three types of bank usage data can be obtained: (a) the unbanked rate,  (b) the underbanked rate, and (c) the rate of unbanked households that cannot afford a bank account for financial reasons. 
Unbanked households do not have any checking or saving accounts with banks or credit unions. Underbanked households have accounts but regularly use alternative financial services such as payday lenders.  The FDIC survey asks unbanked households why they do not have bank accounts. In this analysis, households that answered "Bank Account Fees Are Too High," "Bank Account Fees Are Too Unpredictable," or "Don't Have Enough Money" are counted as households that cannot afford a bank account for financial reasons.
(a) The unbanked rate and (b) the underbanked rate can be influenced not only by bank fees and household income but also by various factors such as geographic access to banks, availability of ID, and people's trust in banks. Therefore, it should be noted that changes in bank fees may not accurately account for the impact on the unbanked and underbanked rates. On the other hand, since the rate of households that cannot afford a bank account for financial reasons is unlikely to be affected by anything other than bank fees and annual household income, the impact of bank fees can be accounted for more accurately.

